[Music]
it was the 1800s America was growing and
vast financial empires were being built
into this era of opportunity one
powerful man emerged the man who pulled
the financial strings of wealthy men and
entire countries a man who brought order
to chaos
J Pierpont Morgan
twice he was called on by American
presidents to save the nation's economy
both times he was criticized for
wielding the power to be able to do so
he amassed a personal fortune spending
his riches in ways that inspired some
and outraged others he was corpulent and
intimidating one contemporary said
meeting his blazing dark eyes was like
confronting the headlights of an express
train bearing down on you
J Pierpont Morgan was as powerful as a
world leader Wall Street was his empire
[Music]
in 1837 the new steam engine was
beginning to transform America creating
new and exciting opportunities it was
into this world of possibility that John
Pierpont Morgan was born on April 17th
in Hartford Connecticut the eldest son
of Junius Spencer Morgan a well-to-do
businessman and Juliet Pierpont Morgan
the daughter of a fiery preacher and
poet
young Pierpont was greatly influenced by
both of his grandfather's every Sunday
he accompanied his grandfather Joseph
Morgan to the local Episcopal Church
Pierpont loved the services especially
when it came to singing the hymns his
other grandfather the Reverend John
Pierpont was known for his radical
sermons about politics and religion
he was eventually forced to leave his
pulpit because of his ideas from his
Pierpont grandfather a Morgan got a
streak of romanticism a streak of
morality and even a certain crusading
streak that would be very important in
his life this crusading streak of
Pierpont's was evident while he was at
school he proved himself to be a natural
leader among the other children
Pierpont's father noticed his sons
abilities and over the years groomed him
for a career in business
he raised his son pearpod with a great
deal of love but also a great deal of
discipline Jr Spencer Morgan expected
that his son would follow in his
footsteps and succeed in the business
world but illness plagued Pierpont and
often kept him out of school from the
time that he was a boy he really had two
personalities one was this very jolly
animated high-spirited outgoing boy with
tremendous energy and health but then he
would suddenly get these fainting spells
and that was accompanied by a
personality that was more that of a
brooding loner
[Music]
forced by illness to spend time alone
Pierpont perfected the game of solitaire
a game he played to relax when he felt
tense or nervous as his health improved
Pierpont spent much of his time
accompanying his family to art galleries
and concerts it was at this time that he
began to develop a lifelong appreciation
for the arts Pierpont Morgan started
collecting as a child he was very
interested in collecting historic
autographs particularly great Americans
Pierpont's interest in history served
him well when he returned to high school
he wrote his commencement essay on his
hero Napoleon Bonaparte
a man whose power he was determined to
emulate Pierpont's father was looking
for a position of power himself and in
1854 he accepted a job at the Peabody
Bank in London it was an incredible
opportunity
Junius would gain access to wealthy
European bankers who in turn could
provide capital to help build a
burgeoning America Pierpont was 17 when
Junius moved the family abroad soon he
was on his way to college in Germany
where he showed a remarkable aptitude
for mathematics
after his first year at the university
Pierpont's father decided it was time
for his son to begin his career and
arranged for him to be given a job in a
New York City banking firm at 20 years
of age Pierpont left his family behind
and sailed for New York ready to strike
out on his own Pierpont began his
business career as a clerk at a Wall
Street bank he worked hard
was orderly and absolutely methodical
and he could add numbers with lightning
speed despite long hours and dedication
to his work Pierpont also began to build
a healthy social life in the city he
worked his way into the finest social
circles
he made influential friends and
cultivated business contacts that helped
him build his career he was often a
guest in the homes of New York's most
prominent families and it was one such
visit that changed his life at a social
gathering Pierpont was introduced to the
daughter of a well-to-do family her name
was Amelia Sturges or Mimi Pierpont was
captivated by Mimi and her family soon
embraced this ambitious young man whose
own family was across the Atlantic
when Pierpont wasn't visiting Mimi he
was searching for new opportunities
Pierpont had big dreams and was
determined to find a way to turn them
into realities he wrote to his father
frequently sharing his personal
observations and thoughts about business
and life in New York City
[Music]
Pierpont's insights and abilities showed
a young man with great potential and the
partners at the firm were beginning to
take notice Pierpont was young but
showed remarkable business instincts
instincts that were soon to be tested in
1860 the firm sent Pierpont south for a
first-hand account of the cotton and
shipping business in Cuba young Pierpont
sampled his first Havana cigar the
beginning of a lifelong passion from
Cuba he went to New Orleans where he
stumbled upon a business opportunity
that he couldn't resist but it was not
without risk a local sea captain was
stuck with a ship load of coffee and no
buyer immediate action was required or
the coffee would spoil using the firm's
money Pierpont purchased the coffee and
set about selling it to new orleans
merchants he pulled it off managing to
turn a tidy little profit in the process
in New York the partners of the Bank
weren't impressed they were angry and
felt the venture was risky but Morgan
believed that fortune smiles on those
who act fast and he believed his
instincts about people would always make
him a winner said the real risk was that
he had misjudged the character of the
captain and that the captain would have
lied to him and this is their the the
quintessential issue of Morgan that he
was able to look at people and
immediately make a judgment of their
character and of their integrity and one
of his greatest strengths
with his modest success in New Orleans
Pierpont soon found that his ambition
outstripped the opportunities the bank
offered so in 1861 impatient and
determined to set off on his own he left
the bank to go into business for himself
Pierpont worked with his father to
invest European money into American
industry times were turbulent however
civil war threatened the country but
young Pierpont was smart and was backed
by a powerful and influential father
America needed capital to grow and
Pierpont Morgan wanted in on the action
of supplying it
but embers of north-south anger were
soon fanned into the flames of Civil War
and young men were going off to fight
shedding their blood for the Union cause
like other young men of means
Pierpont was able to avoid the draft he
paid a substitute three hundred dollars
to take his place and called him the
other jpmorgan not fighting in the war
enabled Pierpont to concentrate on his
work and business was booming long hours
at the office were made varible by his
blossoming love affair with mimi
Pierpont was coming into his own but his
personal fortunes eventually took a turn
for the worse during the summer of 1861
three years after they had met Mimi was
diagnosed with tuberculosis almost
always fatal in the 19th century
Pierpont was devastated
immediately he took control of the
situation he proposed to me me promising
her that he'd help find a cure he was
deeply in love with Mimi he married her
in the family house in New York in fact
he had to carry her downstairs for the
ceremony Pierpont immediately took mimi
to Algiers for their honeymoon
he thought the tropical climate might
save her when Mimi's condition worsened
he brought the best specialists to
attend to her but his efforts were in
vain for months after their marriage On
February 17th 1862
Mimi died in Pierpont's arms
[Music]
here's an extraordinary outpouring if
somebody caught trying to control life
in some way was a terrible loss for him
and he failed but he knew what he was
getting into oddly enough he was daring
and almost he was daring death in some
sort of dramatic way and attempting to
control it the ordered controlled life
that Pierpont had made for himself was
turned upside down and viewed with a
dark chaos he made plans to return to
New York he didn't know how he would
survive the ordeal
you
[Music]
in the winter of 1862 Pierpont Morgan
beloved wife of only four months had
died in his arms he returned to New York
a changed man the loss was so powerful
that in a way it forced him to keep his
genuinely emotional nature under tight
control Pierpont immersed himself in his
business it helped him deal with the
loss of Mimi he continued to work with
his father directing European
investments into American industry
Pierpont was looking for a larger
platform but for now attending to his
father's wishes kept him busy and helped
him overcome his grief however not all
his time was taken up with his new
business ventures he found destruction
and entertainment in his social
activities around town Pierpont also
remembered the comfort that the
Episcopal Church had offered when he
attended Mass with his grandfather
Morgan he joined st. George's Church and
immersed himself in its activities
as he continued to grieve for me me the
church provided a type of redemption
that Pierpont didn't expect it was there
that he met the young beautiful Fanny
Tracy the daughter of a prominent
attorney she was at first put off by
Pierpont's gruff demeanor but soon she
warmed to his affections after a
year-long courtship Pierpont and Fanny
were married at st. George's Church on
May 31st 1865 in their first year
together Fanny gave birth to a daughter
they named her Louisa
over the next several years Fanny gave
pearpod a son and two more daughters
Pierpont bought a beautiful summer home
for his growing family it was a large
Victorian house with a view of the
Hudson River
but once again Pierpont's health began
to fail he was plagued by frequent
headaches and dizzy spells he also
suffered from a skin condition called
acne rosacea it had the terrible effect
of inflating his nose and it was really
just a awful eyesore and for that reason
all the pictures of Pierpont are
actually retouched to reduce the size of
his nose Pierpont's doctors recommended
rest and relaxation he took their advice
by choosing a new hobby that not only
improved his health but his business
prospects as well
he bought a hundred and sixty five foot
yacht and named it the Corsair on the
Corsair business and pleasure went
hand-in-hand Pierpont's prospects were
bright at 33 years of age he had a
beautiful family a yacht two homes and
was earning more than 75 thousand
dollars a year a huge amount in a time
when $2,000 was a comfortable living
he even thought of retiring but once
again his father intervened to change
Pierpont's mind
Junius suggested a partnership with the
powerful banker Anthony Drexel under
Pierpont's leadership the new company
quickly became a powerhouse in
international finance Pierpont's power
grew rapidly and with it his reputation
as a man who could influence events with
all thoughts of retirement completely
out of his head Pierpont was determined
to make his mark in 1879 he got his
chance he was approached by William H
Vanderbilt heir to the Vanderbilt
fortune Vanderbilt wanted to sell
250,000 shares of stock in the New York
Central Railway the deal was tricky such
a vast sum was involved that chaos in
the market was almost guaranteed a
Pierpont accepted the challenge and with
a combination of stealth cunning and
brilliance pulled off the near
impossible feat he successfully sold all
of Vanderbilt shares without shaking the
market for Pierpont the Vanderbilt deal
was a turning point in return for his
services he had demanded a seat on the
New York Central's Board of Directors it
was a brilliant power play and gave
Pierpont financial control over the
railway it was a tactic to gain control
that Pierpont would use often it was
said that he would serve on the board of
all of the companies that he was
interested in but that the chairman of
the board was always forever JP Morgan
sat the financial world began to take
serious notice of Pierpont Morgan he was
fast becoming Wall Street's darling deal
maker and his reputation for business
savvy was matched only by his reputation
for getting what he wanted
physically Morgan was
Welman presents he had piercing black
eyes that could seem to look through
people and read their minds he had his
enormous disfigured discolored nose that
intimidated people and he knew it
Morgan was called upon to use his power
and influence to clean up another
financial mess two of the largest
railroads in America were locked in a
destructive financial battle they had
built lines next to each other in their
attempts to compete but competition had
created chaos money was wasted on
unproductive and unprofitable new tracks
collapse of one or both of these
railroads was imminent and would spell
disaster for investors many of whom were
represented by Junius and Pierpont
Morgan Pierpont was called in to help as
far as the British investors were
concerned
the railroads were the the Wild West
wild wooly and lawless and they felt
that Pierpont Morgan was the sheriff who
would ride in and clean it up Pierpont
strategy was a stroke of genius that
revealed his determination to have
things his way
his solution was to call a meeting of
railroad owners aboard his yacht just a
leisurely boat ride along the Hudson to
discuss a possible agreement once aboard
Morgan let the men know that he expected
a compromise time passed the boat sailed
up and down the Hudson River it was soon
apparent that Morgan would not let the
railroad owners off the boat until they
came to an agreement Morgan was a very
flamboyant and almost operatic figure
and like all great actors he'd like to
have great stage sets for his big set
pieces he found that very often in order
to get a business deal it helped to
isolate people and who also to set a
deadline
Morgan's plan worked the railway owners
agreed to stay out of each other's
territory
Morgan's outrageous tactics earned the
agreement a special name it became known
as the corsair pact
[Music]
by the end of the 19th century Pierpont
Morgan had become a tycoon in his own
right he was no longer living in the
shadow of his father but once again just
as he was enjoying his success a series
of personal tragedy struck
in the winter of 1884 Pierpont's mother
Juliet died in London then in April of
1889 Pierpont took Fanny and their
children to visit his father in the
South of France it was the last time
they would see Junius alive in April of
1890 Junius Morgan was killed in a
carriage accident the death of his
father signaled the change in Pierpont
Morgan zone life Julia's estate was
worth over fourteen million dollars and
Pierpont received the lion's share I
think that Pierpont Morgan father's
death did have a profound effect upon
him I think that effect was a liberating
one when his father died in 1890 it set
Pierpont Morgan free one of the first
things Morgan did with his large
inheritance was to build a bigger more
elaborate yacht this one measured over
241 feet one of the largest pleasure
vessels afloat when somebody asked
Morgan how much it cost to keep such a
large yacht he answered if you have to
ask you can't afford it between the
yachting ventures and the business deals
Morgan's family saw little of him while
he may have spent a lot of time away
from home Morgan still had a profound
effect on his children his only son Jack
was groomed as the heir apparent after
graduating from Harvard in 1889 he began
work as an apprentice on Wall Street
Jack like Pierpont followed his father
into the family business and business
was booming
Morgan's Bank acquired more companies
placing Morgan and his partners on
boards of directors all over the country
but the American economy was fragile and
in 1893 the stock market crashed
[Music]
the nation was thrown into a devastating
depression more than a hundred railroads
declared bankruptcy causing a domino
effect that threatened other businesses
and promised complete collapse of the
economy once again powerful men called
upon Pierpont Morgan to bail them out
Morgan reorganized the railroads by
streamlining operations and was quickly
able to reverse the downward spiral but
his health came at a price
Morgan gained financial control over
many of the companies he had
consolidated his far-reaching control
coined a new term ream organization
Morgan was becoming one of the most
powerful men in the world and powerful
enemies were beginning to emerge
[Music]
by 1893 J Pierpont Morgan was one of the
most powerful men in America but life
wasn't all business for Morgan he
frequently traveled to Europe
voraciously collecting rare books and
great arts shortly after his father's
death in 1890 he began to collect on a
massive scale
and within a very short time he became
quite simply the greatest art collector
of modern times he had only one
steadfast rule if he wanted it he bought
it he was intent on owning the world's
greatest art his efforts invited
comparisons to Napoleon a parallel to
Morgan's childhood idol that would have
thrilled him he once wrote a letter to
his sister saying I'm done with the
Greek antiquities I am now at the
Egyptians he was like a freight train
going from one period of art history to
another he was like a freight train in
business as well he was now 58 years old
and his personal share in his company
was worth more than four million dollars
but Morgan was still looking to expand
his influence the opportunity almost
brought disaster as a result of the
depression of 1893 the federal
government's gold reserves had dropped
to an alarmingly low level without gold
the government's guaranteed to pay its
debts was meaningless foreign banks
heavily invested with American assets
became alarmed and began withdrawing
even more gold
by 1894 the situation was so grim that
it looked as though the United States
government would go broke
[Music]
Morgan moves fast he devised a plan in
which American and European bankers
would invest gold directly in the
government saving it from collapse the
offer of relief was quickly taken to the
president of the United States Grover
Cleveland Morgan played solitaire in his
library as he awaited the president's
response when the answer finally came it
was a disappointment
the President had rejected Morgan's plan
instead he backed a plan to raise the
money by selling bonds directly to the
public even if President Cleveland had
agreed with Morgan his hands were tied
only Congress could borrow money for the
United States and many congressmen were
determined to keep Wall Street power
brokers like Morgan from controlling the
Treasury's coffers but Morgan knew that
the government didn't have time to sell
bonds to the public he was certain that
his plan was the nation's only hope
determined to get his way Morgan sped to
Washington but was told that the
president would not see him
Morgan's reply was Swift and gruff I
have come down to Washington to see the
president and I'm going to stay here
until I see him I think Pierpont Morgan
certainly felt that he was the equal of
the President of the United States the
next morning word came from the White
House that Morgan would be received
during the meeting with the President
and other cabinet members the United
States treasurer was given an urgent
message
turning to the group he announced that
only nine million dollars in gold was
left in the Treasury Morgan seized that
opportunity he pointed out that he knew
of a 10 million dollar draft about to be
presented against the Treasury if that
10 million dollar draft is presented you
can't meet it declared Morgan it will be
all over by three o'clock President
Cleveland thought it over what
suggestions do you have to make mr.
Morgan Morgan had a plan he had
discovered an outdated statute from the
Civil War it allowed the Treasury to buy
gold no longer used but still in effect
it was the loophole needed to circumvent
Congress and allow the Treasury to
implement Morgan's plan President
Cleveland agreed within days the flow of
gold began to run back into the Treasury
completely halting the financial crisis
many hailed Morgan as a hero praising
his patriotism and selflessness others
accused him of manipulating the
government and collecting a profit
people began to decide that Pierpont had
too much power to be able to save the
government of the United States an
extraordinary thing and therefore the
only way that he could have done it is
by having some sort of evil capability
with the chaos uncertainty and intense
criticism that often plagued Morgan's
life there was one source of stability
st. George's Church
[Music]
the Reverend Rainsford one of the few
close friends Morgan had said sometimes
I found him kneeling in prayer or
reading or singing a hymn without organ
and alone no one but the aged sexton and
myself knew that the great master of men
and things was worshiping in the temple
but this great master of men and things
had another side
Morgan was known for enormous appetites
he consumed enormous quantities of port
sherry and wine with dinner he had
breakfast so large they could have
killed a horse his appetites extended to
other areas as well he was often seen in
the company of women other than his wife
and was known to throw extravagant
parties on the Corsair it was said that
he lavished his women with gifts of
diamonds furs and money
his name was connected dramatically with
theater stars
Maxine Elliott and Lillian Russell
he was a very strong believer in the
double standard as even as he became
involved with other women pierpon once
made a very telling comment that there
are always two reasons why a man does
something a good reason and the real
reason and he was always very respectful
of fanny he was very discreet about the
various escapades that he went through
Morgan's passionate nature extended to
his business enterprises in nineteen one
he undertook the largest business
transaction in modern history the
purchase of Carnegie steel china geese
teal was the crowning jewel in the
morgan empire when asked to name his
price andrew carnegie jotted down a
figure on the back of an envelope morgan
looked at the price 493 million dollars
and immediately said I accept with
Carnegie steel under his belt
Morgan formed the United States Steel
Corporation in March of nineteen one its
stock was valued at one billion four
hundred million dollars Morgan had
created the world's first billion dollar
corporation but his enormous power now
brought public scrutiny after his
creation of US Steel he controlled
somewhere between sixty and seventy
percent of the American steel industry
he controlled a third of American
railways at a time when railway stocks
comprised sixty percent of all the
stocks on the New York Stock Exchange
the American public could be forgiven
for imagining that mr. J Pierpont Morgan
owned the United States Morgan had
reached the pinnacle of his power it
looked as though nothing could stop him
right after the creation of US Steel
Morgan formed another massive company
merging two of the nation's largest
railroads it was called northern
securities - Morgan the company would
provide stability among the railroads
positively influencing the American
economy to others it was a monopoly that
gave J Pierpont Morgan a carte blanche
to amass more wealth and power with his
unprecedented success on Wall Street
Morgan thought that his power and
control could easily be extended to
Washington politics his influence helped
William McKinley a friend to big
business become president of the United
States but on September 6 1901 McKinley
was cut down by an assassin's bullet and
died eight days later with McKinley gone
from the White House and public opinion
turning against big business
Morgan soon confronted a man whose power
equaled his own
New York in nineteen one was buzzing
with power money and influence and in
the center of it all was the most
powerful man in the nation
J Pierpont Morgan he had a very powerful
presence descriptions of him walking up
and down Wall Street pushing people out
of the way but the fact is he didn't
have to push people out of the way they
saw him coming and they left out of the
way and he needed all his power and
influence as events forced Morgan into
the toughest fight of his life
Theodore Roosevelt became president
after McKinley's assassination and
immediately set out to rethink
government's support of big business he
was an unknown end today but to the
extent that people in New York knew his
record they also knew that he was
something of a loose cannon who had gone
on record as criticizing businessman
four months after Roosevelt became
president Morgan found out firsthand
where that cannon was pointing the
Attorney General of the United States
Philander C Knox set out to prosecute
Morgan's northern securities company for
breach of the Sherman Antitrust Act of
1890 Roosevelt was determined to break
up the Trust's and return power to the
little guy and he would use Morgan to
set the example for the second time in
his career Morgan rushed to Washington
to see the president in a meeting at the
White House Morgan protested to
Roosevelt that he should have been given
a chance to restructure northern
securities himself that is just what we
did not want you to do the president
replied if we have done anything wrong
said Morgan send your man to my man and
they can fix it up that can't be done
Roosevelt said the Attorney General
added we don't want to fix it we want to
stop it
morgan was furious no politician would
tell J Pierpont Morgan how to run his
business Morgan went to the courts and
fought the breakup of his company but
the decision was upheld by the supreme
court northern securities was officially
dissolved Pierpont Morgan resented
Theodore Roosevelt finally and once when
he heard that Roosevelt was going off to
Africa on a safari Morgan said good I
hope the first lion that meets him does
his duty Morgan knew he had been beaten
but he wasn't about to give up he was
still powerful and just as determined to
control and influence events as ever
despite their father's frequent absences
and his immersion in business affairs
Morgan's children were successful and
well established in their personal lives
Morgan delighted in his grandchildren
his gruff demeanor softened when he was
around them
with his children on their own Morgan
had more time to pursue his travels and
his collecting but his purchases had
outgrown his house so he decided that he
would have a library built to display
his treasures he spared no expense that
a building of this magnitude would be
built as a private library for a private
person in New York was an extraordinary
thing Morgan also gave enormous amounts
of money away in addition to his
numerous charities he gave close to two
million dollars to build monuments to
his father at Harvard University and the
wodsworth Athenaeum a museum in his
hometown of Hartford it was in his new
library however that Morgan would
achieve his final crowning glory in the
fall of nineteen seven and other panic
hit Wall Street one of America's largest
trust companies had collapsed sending
shockwaves throughout the American
economy in Washington President
Roosevelt saw political disaster loom
large immediate action was required and
Roosevelt's advisors knew that there was
only one man with the power to save the
nation the president who had prosecuted
Morgan for having too much control was
about to hand that control back to him
Roosevelt sent the Secretary of the
Treasury to New York with 25 million
dollars in government funds to be placed
at Morgan's disposal Morgan used the
money strategically and bought the
national economy some time but there was
more work to be done the public was in a
panic trusts were continuing to fail as
people rushed to withdraw their money
the situation looked desperate but
Morgan had a plan he reasoned that by
rescuing the failing trust it might
reverse the downturn and restore public
confidence he knew the answer was to get
the larger trusts to invest money in
their weaker competitors this wasn't
easy but Morgan's powers of persuasion
were unmatched he gathered the trust
company presidents in his study in the
library
beneath the gaze of his statues of
saints and Madonna's he cast a long
penetrating look at each man and
launched into a plea for cooperation
that at times sounded like a command he
left the president's to debate the
merits of the plan Morgan then walked to
the front door of the library locked it
and removed the key he retired to
another room and played solitaire
waiting for a solution hours passed and
still the men could not agree on
Morgan's plan but they would agree
eventually Morgan had locked them in no
matter what it took the bankers would
see things Morgan's way or they'd stay
in his library forever
with the entire economy in peril the
nation's most influential men were
locked in pierpont morgan library all
night they tried in vain to work out a
solution to the financial crisis
throughout the night the bankers went to
Morgan with compromises or other
suggestions and he would be sitting at
the desk and he would be flipping his
cards and one of his lieutenants would
come in and say mr. Morgan they may bank
presidents have proposed a ten million
dollar loan and he would be flipping his
cards and he would look up and he would
say it's not enough thank yous cards
again in the early hours of the morning
Morgan marched into the study the men
still had not come to a solution but
Morgan had he pushed a contract drawn up
by his partners and a pen into the hand
of the leader of the Trust Company
presidents he pointed to the contract
and said here's the place and here's the
pen completely exhausted and beaten down
the President signed and the others
followed the Trust's had agreed to
contribute to the 25 million dollar pool
within days the economy rally Morgan's
returned to Wall Street during the panic
of nineteen seven signaled the last time
that the United States would allow a
banker to control the nation's resources
the way Morgan had soon the federal
government set up formal agencies to do
what Morgan had done single-handedly
protect the national economy prior to
1913 we did not have a Federal Reserve
Board in this country we had J Pierpont
Morgan he was like a one-man central
bank shortly after the crisis of 1917 to
semi-retirement he was tired now in his
70s he spent time traveling and
collecting art
in the United States the debate over
Morgan's influence continued public
opinion turned firmly against big
business in 1912 a Senate committee was
set up to investigate what they termed
the money Trust's on Wall Street
Morgan was ordered to appear in
Washington in December Samuel under
Meyer an affluent New York City trial
lawyer asked the questions for the
committee
Morgan was drilled for hours but in one
line of questioning he was able to
redeem his actions in the eyes of a
weary public under Meyer asked Morgan is
not commercial credit based primarily
upon money or property
Morgan answered no sir the first thing
is character before money or property
under my accounted before money or
anything else
Morgan replied money cannot buy it
because a man I do not trust could not
get money from me on all the bonds in
Christendom spectators applauded Morgan
had stated the banking philosophy on
which he had built his empire but his
reign as the Emperor of American Finance
was over the country embraced the
twentieth century
the banking world moved forward without
Pierpont Morgan
as soon as the hearings were over Morgan
returned to his travels but Pierpont
Morgan 'he's time ran out on March 31st
1913 he died in his sleep in a hotel in
Rome he was 75 thousands of people
flocked to st. George's Church for
Pierpont Morgan funeral his body was
taken to Hartford where he was buried in
the family plot as a final tribute the
New York Stock Exchange stayed closed
that morning one of the few times in its
history upon his death Morgan's personal
fortune was estimated at over 68 million
dollars his art collection alone was
worth another 60 million his wife Fanny
lived well into her 80s dying in the
home she shared with her husband
Morgan's son Jack took control of JP
Morgan & Company which helped control of
her banking and other institutions with
assets of over two billion dollars the
firm still exists today Morgan left his
greatest treasure his art collection to
the American people many of his works
were donated to the Metropolitan Museum
of Art and the wodsworth Athenaeum the
Pierpont Morgan Library opened to the
public in 1924 stands as a beautiful
monument to the awesome power that one
man was able to amass in the course of a
lifetime in a way Pierpont Morgan is our
Napoleon were fascinated by him were
fascinated by a sense of control over
his environment
we're fascinated by his successes are
even more fascinated by his failures in
his escapes after Morgan's death his
once bitter rival Theodore Roosevelt
summed up Morgan's life mr. Morgan was
politically opposed to me yet whenever I
was brought into contact with him I was
struck not only by his very great power
but by his sincerity and truthfulness
J Pierpont Morgan used his integrity and
his influence to transform Wall Street
at the turn of the century in the
process he changed America forever
[Music]